GWEN IFILL: A landslide
vote against austerity.
Greeks reject European
terms for a bailout,
a risky gamble with banks
the verge on collapse.
Good evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Also ahead this Monday: a World
Cup win for team USA in soccer
-- what the American women's
third title means for the
future of the sport.
GWEN IFILL: Plus, celebrating
50 years of good vibes with the
Grateful Dead, who spent
the weekend saying farewell
to their devoted fans.
BILL KREUTZMANN, Grateful Dead:
We were just really gung-ho,
wanting to play. And
that's what -- that's how you
feel about every day. Any day
you had a chance to play music,
you got together and played.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Those are some
of the stories we're covering on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The leaders of
Germany and France pressed the
Greek government today
to offer up serious financial
aid proposals in an effort to
jump-start a new round of
talks. That comes a day after
more than 61 percent of Greek
voters rejected the terms
of an international
bailout deal.
Meanwhile, the European Central
Bank moved to raise the amount
of collateral Greek banks
must pay for emergency loans.
We will take a closer look at
the impact of the landslide
vote, and talk to Greece's
ambassador to the U.S., right
after this news summary.
GWEN IFILL: Greece's economic
uncertainty pushed stocks lower
on Wall Street today.
The Dow Jones industrial
average lost 46 points to close
at 17683. The Nasdaq fell
17 points, and the S&P
500 slipped eight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Twin bombings
rocked Central Nigeria
overnight, killing 44 people.
The
blasts targeted a Muslim
restaurant and a mosque in Jos,
about 150 miles northeast of
the capital, Abuja. Nearly 70
people were wounded, including
many who were rushed to
the hospital last night for
treatment. The attacks were
believed to be the work of
Islamic
State affiliate Boko Haram. The
militants have killed more than
300 Nigerians in the
past week alone.
GWEN IFILL: Combating the
Islamic State was at the top of
the agenda as President
Obama paid a rare visit to the
Pentagon this afternoon. He met
with top military leaders
for a briefing on the ongoing
U.S.-led campaign against the
militant group.
Afterward, the president said
the fight won't be quick, but
acknowledged the significant
progress made so far.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: Our coalition
has now hit ISIL with more
than 5,000 airstrikes. We have
taken out thousands of fighting
positions, tanks, vehicles,
bomb factories, and
training camps.
We have eliminated thousands of
fighters, including senior ISIL
commanders. And over
the past year, we have seen
that, when we have an effective
partner on the ground, ISIL
can be pushed back.
GWEN IFILL: The president's
statement followed an uptick in
U.S.-led coalition airstrikes
in Syria over the weekend. The
aerial operations targeted
Islamic State-controlled
structures
and transit routes surrounding
the militants' stronghold of
Raqqa.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Foreign
ministers from six world powers
met with their Iranian
counterpart
today in Vienna to make one
final push ahead of tomorrow's
deadline to reach a nuclear
weapons agreement. But there
were no major signs of progress,
as U.S. Secretary of State
John Kerry negotiated alongside
officials from five other
nations and Iran.
His spokesman warned, if the
Iranian regime doesn't adhere to
previous agreements, there
will be no deal.
REAR ADM. JOHN KIRBY, Pentagon
Press Secretary: We will only
accept a deal that effectively
close off Iran's pathways to a
nuclear weapon, and it will have
to be a deal that can stand
up to the scrutiny of not just
our experts but experts around
the world. We're not
there yet, and there are some
important issues still to be
resolved.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A White House
spokesman acknowledged it was
certainly possible that
tomorrow's
self-imposed
deadline could slip.
GWEN IFILL: South Carolina's
statehouse is one step closer to
removing the Confederate
Battle Flag from a pole on its
grounds in Columbia. The state
Senate passed a crucial
vote on legislation that would
take down the flag. But the
bill still requires approval
from the state's House of
Representatives and Republican
Governor Nikki Haley, who
recently
reversed course and said the
flag should be removed. The
debate comes amid growing
criticism
in the wake of a shooting
rampage at a black church in
Charleston.
Hundreds of thousands of
faithful gathered in Ecuador's
main port city today to watch
Pope Francis celebrate mass.
The service, which was dedicated
to families, was held
in a park in Guayaquil. It's
the pontiff's second visit to
his native region since becoming
the leader of the Catholic
Church in 2013. He travels next
to Bolivia and Paraguay.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it was
disclosed today that comedian
Bill Cosby admitted in a 2005
deposition that he had obtained
quaaludes to drug women he
wanted to have sex with.
That is according to court
documents made public. Cosby
has been accused by more than
two dozen women of sexual
misconduct in incidents dating
back more than four decades. He
has
never been criminally charged.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a vote against austerity sends
Greece into the unknown; what's
next for women's soccer after
team USA's World Cup win?; the
week ahead in politics with
Tamara Keith and Susan Page;
good vibes, nostalgia and
farewells from the Grateful
Dead; and
why more Americans are
moving to Mexico to retire.
GWEN IFILL: A historic moment
in Greece this weekend, as
voters drew the line on more
austerity after five years of
government cuts. But can Greece
strike a new deal with its
creditors? Or will they be
forced to or choose to leave the
Eurozone altogether?
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant begins our coverage from
Athens.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It was a
resounding no to more austerity
and the results of the
referendum
were greeted with loud
celebrations in Syntagma Square.
CHRISTINA VLACHAKI, Greece
(through translator): This is
our first step to our next
battle.
Now it truly starts. I do not
think that everything will
suddenly be perfect, but it
is a first step in
making fear go away.
NIKI KALOMIRI, Greece: This
result filled me with hope for
tomorrow for Greece. I'm
very proud of the Greek people,
very, very proud. We don't want
to be slaves.
MALCOLM BRABANT: First thing
this morning, Prime Minister
Alexis Tsipras convened a
meeting
with Greek political leaders,
asking for and winning broad
support as he tries to restart
negotiations with international
lenders. Many in Greece believe
it will be a bumpy ride.
NICK MALKOUTZIS, Editor,
MacroPolis: There have to be
doubts about whether the Tsipras
government can negotiate itself
out of this corner. Over the
last six months, there
have been many, many mistakes,
man dead ends that they have
gone up. I would say what
Sunday's referendum does is it
gives them a very clear and
strong mandate to go back
and to try and do something.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Discussions
were also ongoing in Paris,
where German Chancellor Angela
Merkel
met this evening with French
President Francois Hollande. An
emergency summit of Eurozone
leaders convenes
tomorrow in Brussels.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through translator): We
respect the decision of
the referendum as a vote of a
sovereign democratic state. And
now we have to deal with that
decision. We're saying very
clearly that the door for talks
remains open. And tomorrow's
meeting of the heads of states
belonging to the Eurozone ought
to be understood in that
sense.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And the
message from the White House
remained the same as before the
vote: Negotiate a way to
remain in the Eurozone.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: The only way that
that will happen is to
agree to a package of reforms
and financing that will allow
Greece to get back on a path
of economic growth and debt
sustainability. That's the only
available resolution that
is in the collective interests
of those in Europe who are
involved.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But, back in
Greece, support to exit the
Eurozone was still a priority
for many, including those of the
Socialist Workers Party
headquarters in a dingy Athenian
street. They were packing away
the no posters and promising to
fight Tsipras' Syriza Party
if he signs a bailout deal
that the people reject.
PANOS GARGANOS, Socialist
Workers Party: If Syriza signs
a deal against the will of
people
who voted no, it will be faced
with massive resistance.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It wasn't just
the left that voted no in the
referendum. Alexis
Mantheakis, formerly a senior
official with a right-wing
nationalist party, believes
Greece
is now in a strong
negotiating position.
ALEXIS MANTHEAKIS, Political
Analyst: If Greece is forced
into a corner and the banks
are dried up, and they give us
no money, then the government
has the last resort of staying
out of the euro, in which case I
think you will have a knock-on
effect of trillions of
dollars lost. One-and-a-half
trillion was lost within months
with -- just in one day
on the stock markets in the
referendum announcement.
If we go out of the euro, that's
our last stick. We don't want
to use it. But if
we're forced into a corner, I
think the government should do
it.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The
uncertainty of what happens to
Greece and the euro wobbled
financial
markets around the world today.
The dive was steadied by the
announcement that the
Greek finance minister, Yanis
Varoufakis, would resign.
For the time being, Greece
remains afloat financially,
Just. The European Central
Bank has decided to maintain
what's called the emergency
liquidity assistance program
to Greek banks, so that their
customers can continue to make
withdrawals. The banks
were supposed to open tomorrow,
but will remain shuttered for at
least two more days. The
maximum withdrawal is just $67.
Without the ECB's helping hand,
Greek banks would have collapsed
within days. If Greek
proposals fail to impress in
Brussels tomorrow, the E.U.
could decide to end its support,
and Greece could really become
the poor man of Europe.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this
is Malcolm Brabant in Athens.
GWEN IFILL: As the government
braces for next steps, we turn
now to Greece's ambassador
to Washington,
Christos Panagopoulos.
Thank you so much for
joining us, Mr. Ambassador.
CHRISTOS PANAGOPOULOS, Greek
Ambassador to the United States:
Thanks for having me.
GWEN IFILL: So, now, as you
look at what the voters said, no
to austerity, what do
you think comes next?
CHRISTOS PANAGOPOULOS:
Next comes a euro summit.
They're going to convene the
heads of government and the
states of the European Union
tomorrow.
We will have a Eurogroup.
That's the procedure. But, in
substance, what the referendum
brought
with this is unanimity of let's
say 80 percent of the parties
that represent the Greek
Parliament,
which they support the prime
minister to go tomorrow to
Brussels and present a Greek
proposal.
And we have reasons to hope that
we're going to reach an
agreement in principle, and then
trying to renormalize the
country economically.
GWEN IFILL: As you know, some
people think that unanimity that
you describe is going
to take Greece off a cliff.
Why are they wrong?
CHRISTOS PANAGOPOULOS: Because
it's the first time since quite
a few months, I should
say, that the political leaders
decided to back the government
to reach an agreement.
And this is a very powerful
card. On the other hand, if you
look to our partners in
Europe and also our American
partners, nobody has brought
anything if we fail to reach an
agreement. The lenders -- let
me put it very simply -- they
are going to lose their
money. And, of course, we're
going to suffer a lot, no
question about this, but who's
going
to profit? No one.
So, it's a win-win situation to
come down at the very last
moment and find agreement.
And I think this is doable.
GWEN IFILL: So, as you go to
make your appeal to the European
governments who are part of
this, is there anything that
Greece is willing to give up, to
put on the table?
CHRISTOS PANAGOPOULOS: We have
a comprehensive proposal to
present, but, as I told you
before,
the issue of the sustainability
of our debt is on the table.
Why? We don't like to come back
after a few months discussing
about the Greek crisis.
So, yes, we're ready to take
very tough measures. But, at
the same time, we should
deal with the sustainability of
the debt, which is agreed back
in 2012, but was never
implemented, the discussion.
GWEN IFILL: In your opinion,
this will test the strength of
the Eurozone, not just of
the government of Greece?
CHRISTOS PANAGOPOULOS:
It's another test.
All the history of the European
Union is to find ways out of a
crisis after crisis and
become stronger. That's our
hope, that through debate, with
difficulty, we're going to find
our way out starting from
tomorrow and trying to normalize
back our country and the
Eurozone
for the benefit of Europe and,
let me say, of the Western
community all in all.
GWEN IFILL: What are the
chances that this leads to
Greece being forced or choosing
to
exit the Eurozone? And will
that be a good thing for Greece?
CHRISTOS PANAGOPOULOS: Well,
when you go to a battle, you
don't ask starting about
the failures, so we hope that
we're going to succeed to have.
All the unanimity, with the one
exception of the parliamentary
parties, is to keep Greece
in the Eurozone. And that's
what we hear from our partners
all over Europe, elected
and not elected officials.
Also, today, the White House
repeated its wish for a
compromise from both parties,
adding
at the end that they should take
care of the sustainability of
the Greek debt, which is
a big issue right
now on the table.
GWEN IFILL: Bottom line, are
you as optimistic now as you
were, say, a few months ago that
Greece is going to find a
way out of this muddle?
CHRISTOS PANAGOPOULOS: We are
as optimistic as ever because,
right now, it's the time
to decide. We have no more
time. And, tomorrow, we're
going to see, I hope, positive
results.
GWEN IFILL: Christos
Panagopoulos, ambassador to the
United States from Greece, thank
you
very much.
CHRISTOS PANAGOPOULOS:
Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: We turn now to a
look at the broader debate under
way in the wake of the
Greek referendum.
For that, we're joined by New
York Times columnist Paul
Krugman, who is also professor
of economics
at the Graduate Center at the
City University of New York, and
Stephan Richter. He is
publisher and editor in
chief of The Globalist.
Stephan Richter, you just heard
that statement of optimism
coming from the Greek
ambassador.
What do you think the fallout
is going to be from this vote
the weekend?
STEPHAN RICHTER, The Globalist:
It's going to be severe, because
there have been lots
of attempts, from Angela Merkel,
from the SPD in Germany, from
certainly the leader
of Italy, France, and so on, to
build a bridge for Mr. Tsipras.
Angela Merkel herself took him
basically under his -- wing, a
neophyte, a young politician.
She wanted to build a bridge.
She risked a lot. But the
Greeks, basically, this
government
has thrown away the belief of
others that, even if we had a
deal tomorrow, something
magical happened, that it has
either the will or the capacity
to implement the agreement.
As we know from many of these
agreements over time throughout
the world -- this is not just
a Greece situation. Washington,
with the IMF, has dealt a lot of
conditionality and
other things over the years.
Countries must be willing to
change in order to get to a
brighter future. And it's not
about just opening banks and
throwing some money their
way. That would be
nice if it were that.
But the situation really is, if
you think all the euro crisis
away, Greece had problems
before it got ever started in
the euro. Those problems are
still with us. And that's what
it needs to rectify. And money
can't change that. It takes far
deeper change in Greece.
GWEN IFILL: Paul Krugman?
PAUL KRUGMAN, Columnist, The New
York Times: Well, I think one
thing that is really important
to understand (AUDIO GAP) it has
raised taxes and slashed
spending to the tune of what
would
be more than $2 trillion a year
if it was happening in the
United States.
So, we're talking about a Greek
government that has under
successive leaders made enormous
sacrifices. It's bizarre to
have people talking as if they
haven't done anything.
They have done a lot of these
structural reforms as well.
The problem is that what the
euro leaders, the Troika, had
been trying to done do is
essentially impossible. When a
country is fairly deep in debt,
as Greece was, even at
the beginning of this, though
it's worse now, to try to,
through austerity, bring that
debt
under control, is
an impossible task.
What you're doing is, you're
bashing the economy so badly
that the economy shrinks fast
than
anything you can do on the
budget side. So, no,
essentially, Europe has been
completely
living in a fantasy world on all
of this. I don't know what the
answer -- I mean,
I suspect that the answer is
going to be Greek exit from the
euro. But the notion that
Greeks have somehow failed to
deliver, after all the
incredible suffering they have
gone
through, is just -- part of
the problem is that belief.
GWEN IFILL: Stephan Richter, we
have seen today the IMF and the
European Central Bank
and the Netherlands and Germany
all pretty much hold the line.
Do you think they hear
what it is that Mr.
Krugman is talking about?
STEPHAN RICHTER: No, because
the point he's making about debt
relief, and which he made
in The New York Times today, is
really not what is at issue.
I don't think there are many
German politicians or even
German citizens who are
expecting
any money back out of Greece. I
think there was a big mess. The
German banks were in
part faulty. Investment banks,
Goldman Sachs helped the Greek
government fake its statistics
and so on. There's plenty
of blame to go around.
Nobody expects money comes back
from Greece. But Greece has a
tradition of taking the
concession and then not
delivering. When they got into
the euro, basically, the benefit
was that Greece got much lower
interest rates, which helps an
economy, helps entrepreneurs
to do business. But instead of
using it to improve their
economy, they basically used
it to hire more
people in government.
Every party packed the payrolls
of the government, and then they
were unelected, and the next
team came in, the old guys
stayed. And this is not a way
to make Greece productive.
There
are very many Greek productive
people. Unfortunately, many of
them live abroad, especially in
the
United States. There is
entrepreneurship in Greece,
theoretically, but it's
basically
voted with their
feet to move abroad.
GWEN IFILL: Paul Krugman, are
these other nations in the
Eurozone, especially Germany,
are they trying to make Greece
an example, for fear of the same
sort of instability spreading?
PAUL KRUGMAN: Well, there is
some. That's speculation. We
don't really know that.
It's hard not to suspect that.
The main right now is you have
to, is there -- if your
notion is, well, Greek society
has always been corrupt, well,
you knew that. And it's
not -- this is an impossible --
talk about mission creep, trying
to turn this from, let's
deal with this financial
problem, let's deal with this
macroeconomic problem to let's
remake
Greek society, that's saying
that you want Greece out.
And then, if that actually
happens, Europe is going to be
very sorry, because the
consequences
for the whole European system,
the consequences for the
European project will be
terrible.
In the end, if Greece leaves
the euro, the consequences for
the Greeks will be a few
months of chaos, but possibly a
big gain in competitiveness and
recovery.
Remember, Greece functioned as
an economy before there was a
euro. The notion that
they cannot survive without is
wrong. And the folly -- I mean,
I have no brief for the
current government of Greece.
They are immature,
inexperienced. But compared
with the monstrous
folly that's been repeated year
after year on the part of
Europe's leaders, it's nothing.
This is an incredible
failure of judgment.
GWEN IFILL: So, should the
Eurozone, Stephan Richter, go?
Should Greeks go from the
Eurozone
or should the Eurozone
just cut Greece loose?
STEPHAN RICHTER: The tragedy is
that the Greek case has shown
that in order to for
the Eurozone to survive, there
needs to a minimum agreement on
fiscal policies, on lots
of policies, and the Greek
government under any stripe --
this is not just a Syriza
problem
-- is outside of that consensus.
That's the tragedy. In order to
preserve the Eurozone, we will
see, in all likelihood,
a Grexit, unless Mr. Tsipras
pulls one more rabbit out of his
hat, which is that he comes
up with a unity government and
can say, this is no longer about
politics, we're all in
this together. But that's a
very low probability. But
that's his last card.
GWEN IFILL: Grexit means
Greek exit. I love that.
But, Paul Krugman, what do you
think about that? Is there a
rabbit to be pulled out
of the hat?
PAUL KRUGMAN: Well, if we're
talking about unity government,
Greece has had a series
of those, right?
It has had a consensus. By and
large, it has done 90 percent,
95 percent of what the
Troika told it to. And the
results have been catastrophic.
If that's the demand
now, that once again Greece
sacrifice -- the current Greek
government sacrifice its own
principles, go back on what it
promised the electorate, this
time it's really going to
work, well, I don't think you're
going to blame Greece for the
consequences, if that
what happens.
GWEN IFILL: Paul Krugman of The
New York Times and Stephan
Richter of The Globalist,
thank you both very much.
STEPHAN RICHTER: Thank you.
PAUL KRUGMAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. women's
soccer team set itself apart
last night with a historic
achievement. We're about to
look at what this outcome means,
and the state of women's
sports vs. men's.
But, first, we're not yet 24
hours from our victory in
Vancouver, a quick look back.
MAN: The U.S. wins the
2015 women's World Cup!
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was a
record-breaking victory, and it
came in decisive fashion.
The Americans beat defending
champion Japan 5-to-2, avenging
their 2011 loss in the finals,
and winning their first
World Cup since 1999.
Midfielder Carli Lloyd
scored three times,
a first in a women's final, and
the U.S. had a 4-0 lead within
the first 16 minutes.
MAN: Hat trick for Lloyd!
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lloyd, who won
player of the tournament
honors,said the team just wrote
history.
CARLI LLOYD, U.S. Women's
National Team: I'm so proud of
this group. We have executed
our game plan each and every
game. And to make it to the
final, to win 5-2, unbelievable
moment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Afterwards, head
coach Jill Ellis reflected on
the sooner-than-expected
success.
JILL ELLIS, Head Coach, U.S.
Women's National Team: We
talked about trying to start
fast.
And that's been one of our
mantras, start fast, finish
strong. And I mean, they came
out of the gate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A sellout crowd
of more than 53,000, including
Vice President Joe Biden,
was on hand in Vancouver. And
back in the U.S., the final
posted the highest
metered-market
TV rating ever for soccer
game on a single network.
The Americans now have three
women's World Cup titles, more
than any other country. And
today, in turn, they received
uniforms with a coveted third
star on the chest.
But despite the celebrating,
there was criticism surrounding
disparities for women playing
in the World Cup. Unlike the
men's tournament, the women were
forced to play on artificial
turf, a surface that's been
blamed for injuries and unusual
bounces. American fan favorite
Abby Wambach was among the most
vocal critics of the fake grass.
Another issue: the World Cup
prize money. When Germany won
the men's tournament last
year, it took home $35 million.
But the U.S. women won only $2
million this year.
What does this win mean for the
future of women's professional
soccer in the U.S.?
We turn to Cheryl Cooky, a
professor of women's studies at
Purdue University, who has
published
studies on the differences
between the way men's and
women's sports are seen. And
Deborah
Slaner Larkin is the CEO of the
Women's Sports Foundation, which
works toward safe and equitable
sports opportunities
for girls and women.
And we welcome you both.
Deborah Larkin, to you first.
How big a deal is this women's
World Cup?
DEBORAH SLANER LARKIN, CEO,
Women's Sports Foundation:
Well, it's a huge deal.
This really started from 1999,
when we won the second World
Cup, and the next generation
of girls who looked up to those
stars are playing today, so it's
not only those athletes,
but it's the next generation of
girls and boys in all sports who
want to play.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Cheryl Cooky,
how do you see the significance
of it?
CHERYL COOKY, Purdue University:
I think of this as a tremendous
moment, not only for
the U.S. women's soccer team,
but for all those fans out
there, all the aspiring young
girls and boys who want to be
athletes. I think this is a
tremendous moment for them.
I think it's a tremendous moment
for our culture as well, that we
can all join together and
celebrate the tremendous
accomplishments and prowess in
female athleticism that we saw
displayed last night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Deborah Larkin,
we mentioned the disparity
between men's and women's
soccer.
How much disparity
is there today?
DEBORAH SLANER LARKIN: Oh, it's
(AUDIO GAP) is much more
difficult to play on, and the
men do not have to
play on a turf field.
And so while they play the same
amount of time with the same
amount of energy, the
temperatures
on a turf field are much, much
hotter. So it's very dramatic,
what the differences are.
I kind of likened it to when we
used to talk about that when
Fred Astaire and Ginger
Rogers would dance, Ginger
Rogers had to do it going
backwards and in heels. That's
the difference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Cheryl Cooky,
what would you add to that? And
why is this disparity
still there more than 40 years
after Title IX, the federal law,
was passed outlawing
discrimination on the basis
of gender in education?
CHERYL COOKY: Just to add to
that, I think it's interesting
to look at the media coverage.
The Major League soccer -- men's
soccer league in the United
States just recently signed
an eight-year $90 million
contract with a major sports
network, ESPN and FOX Sports,
to have their games televised,
whereas the National Women's
Soccer League, the female
counterpart, has no TV contract,
has only three sponsors,
compared to the 20 sponsors
for the men's team.
And we know that the MLS
professional league has
struggled in terms of generating
revenue
and generating a fan base. So,
I think the lack of a national
contract for the women's
team really does impact how we
can really come to know women's
sports -- or women's
soccer, I should say,
in the United States.
How this all connects to Title
IX, I think, is a really
interesting question. We have
seen a tremendous growth and
explosion in the number of girls
and women that are participating
in sports. However, there are
still a number of areas -- and
we were talking about media
and sponsorship and those sorts
of issues -- there's a number of
ways in which women's
sports, both at the high school,
collegiate level, as well as the
professional level,
still suffer from
these disparities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me --
Deborah Larkin, let me turn to
you on that, not only why they
still exist, but what can be
done about it? We are decades
past this -- again, the passage
of this law. What needs to
happen for there to be more of a
-- not to abuse the term -- but
for there to be more of
an even playing field?
DEBORAH SLANER LARKIN:
That's right.
Well, we really have to put
teeth into the law when we talk
about compliance of Title
IX. In high school sports, when
Title IX was first passed, one
in 27 girls played sports.
Now the number we
use is two in five.
But I'm going to talk about it
in a different way. A third of
the girls who play are getting
all the kind of exercise in
sports they need. A third get a
little. And a third get
none. And it's the third that
get none and a little are who we
need to focus on, because
they're not getting the
education, health and leadership
benefits.
Girls who play sports do better
in school, have aspirations for
college, earn more money
in the work force, are less
involved in delinquent
behaviors. So we need to put
our money where
our mouth is and put money
behind girls sports and
compliance for Title IX.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Cheryl Cooky,
how do you see this question of
girls and women not having
the same opportunity as men when
it comes to participate in
sports?
CHERYL COOKY: Yes, I think
there's a lot of ways in which
there are still many types
of inequalities, some that we
can see and some that we can't,
some that we're aware
of and some that we're not.
If we look at simple things like
when sports are played,the NBA,
the professional league
-- and, of course, this isn't
applying to Title IX, but we see
this at the high school
and the collegiate levels.
Oftentimes, the men's teams play
in the high profile, the
regular season. The girls and
women's teams oftentimes play in
off-seasons. They have
the less desirable playing time.
So I think that there's these
kinds of subtleties that are
just beyond getting more girls
involved
in sports.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, this big
win for USA women's soccer
certainly gives us an
opportunity
to look at these issues again.
And we want to thank both of you
for talking with us. Cheryl
Cooky, Deborah Slaner Larkin,
we appreciate it.
DEBORAH SLANER
LARKIN: Thank you.
CHERYL COOKY: Thank
you very much.
GWEN IFILL: Fourth of July
brought parades, patriotism and
even a few fireworks to the
campaign trail.
No better time, then, for
Politics Monday, our weekly look
at the state of the campaign.
Joining me tonight, Tamara Keith
of NPR and Susan Page of USA
Today.
Ladies, let's follow the money.
Let's talk about what some of
these candidates have said
they have been raising. We see
that in the three-month period
that people have been measuring,
Hillary Clinton says she's
raised $45 million, Bernie
Sanders in that same period of
time,
for someone who has not taken as
being a real challenge to her on
some levels, $15 million,
Ted Cruz $14 million, and Ben
Carson $8.3 million, which is
also not chicken feed.
So, where is all this money
coming from and from whom?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well, for Hillary
Clinton, it's coming from a mix.
She has been doing a lot of
big-dollar fund-raisers, about
$2,700 fund-raisers per head.
That's
the max that someone could get
for the primary. She's done
these like three, four
fund-raisers
a day, where if you add it up
it's something like $1 million
in a single day.
At the same time, she's
also been trying to
get a lot of small donors, and
when this number came out, her
campaign was careful to say,
and look at this; 91 percent of
our donations were for $100 or
less. They definitely want
to promote the lower number.
Bernie Sanders, he isn't having
any big-dollar fund-raisers and
his campaign is very proud
that the average donation is
something like $33. And it's
pretty remarkable to raise
$15 million $33 at a time.
GWEN IFILL: I'm also interested
that a lot of candidates,
including Ted Cruz, who, even
though he raised $14 million,
put out a statement that he --
that plus his uncoordinated --
uncoordinated
PAC has actually -- political
action committee -- has actually
raised a lot more.
How much are these candidates
informally depending on the
PACs?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today: Well, a lot.
And even though we're breaking
records here, Hillary Clinton
broke the record that Barack
Obama set in the 2016 campaign
for first-quarter fund-raising,
$45 million. That is going
to be dwarfed by what Hillary
Clinton-related super PACs and
PACs are going to be raising
and spending on her behalf.
And they're not supposed to be
coordinated. It's interesting
that Ted Cruz felt free
to cite that as part of his
total, not illegal, but it does
give the lie to the technical
rule that they're supposed to be
uncoordinated. In fact, they're
staffed by the people who
used to work for the candidates.
There is all kinds of
relationships there that they
can count on.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Let's talk about the squeeze
from the right and the left,
especially starting with the
Democratic side. On the right,
we have Jim Webb getting into
the race and basically running
to the right of Hillary Clinton.
And we have Bernie Sanders, who
is attracting huge
crowds running to the left of
Hillary Clinton, and near as we
can tell. Is this having
an effect on Hillary Clinton?
TAMARA KEITH: I think that what
Hillary Clinton would say is
that she's continuing
to run her own race.
And if you look at what she's
doing -- tomorrow, she's doing
an interview on CNN. This will
be her first sit-down televised
interview, national televised
interview of this campaign.
Her campaign had told us a
couple of months ago that they
were planning to start rolling
these interviews out
over the summer.
So even things that seem like it
might be like she's running
scared, actually, it all
seems to be part of their
playbook. It doesn't seem like
they have changed the playbook
just
yet.
GWEN IFILL: What
about that, Susan?
SUSAN PAGE: I think
that they're concerned.
And I think they're concerned
because, number one, not so much
that Bernie Sanders is going
to take the nomination away from
her. I think that's extremely
unlikely. He is getting
these huge crowds. And he's got
a message that is resonating
with a lot of Democrats.
It's a more liberal message, a
more progressive message than
she would naturally articulate.
That is putting pressure on her
on things like the free trade
pact.
And, also, his manner. She has
got all kinds of problems in
looking approachable and looking
like she's a fully-fledged human
being. And he's all -- he's
just totally approachable.
He's 100 percent authentic,
approachable Bernie Sanders. So
I think the contrast
is not helpful to her.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Go ahead.
TAMARA KEITH: I was just going
to say that when I talk to
people out when I'm reporting,
they say things like, gosh,
Bernie Sanders is just so real.
And it creates that contrast
with Hillary Clinton, who has
been in public life for so
long. She's had her picture
taken so many times that she has
that smile down just right.
And Bernie is just out there
being Bernie. And so it does
create sort of a stylistic
contrast for people.
GWEN IFILL: On the Republican
side, the pressure, the squeeze
seems to be brought
on Republican candidates by one
Donald Trump, who, because of
what he said in his announcement
about Mexicans and many of them
being rapists, even though he's
sure some of them are OK,
has put a lot of Republican
candidates into the position of
having to respond, denounce,
distance themselves?
SUSAN PAGE: But not that eager
to do so, because the fact is
Donald Trump has a message
that appeals to some Republican
voters with a very hard line on
immigration.
It took a while. It took a week
for other Republican candidates
to come out and to be
critical of him, even though
this is very bad news, I think,
for the Republican Party
in a general election. The
Republicans will not win the
White House unless they do
better
among Hispanic voters than Mitt
Romney did. And they are not
going to do better among
Hispanic voters if they have a
line on immigration that is
offensive to so many Hispanics.
GWEN IFILL: How difficult --
for instance, Jeb Bush came out
today and said he found
it offensive. He's married to a
woman who was born in Mexico.
And Donald Trump's response
was, well, he had to do
that because of his wife.
Which...
TAMARA KEITH: Well, Donald
Trump has deleted that tweet.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Did he really?
TAMARA KEITH: He did.
I think, in some ways, Donald
Trump is the ultimate Twitter
troll, and a lot of these
candidates were trying not to
feed the troll for a while. And
then they realized, oh,
wait, he is saying things
that are damaging.
And so, Jeb Bush came out
relatively early, though, fact
is Donald Trump made these
remarks
June 16. It is now July 6 -- 7.
GWEN IFILL: Took a long time.
TAMARA KEITH: It took
a very long time.
But Jeb Bush did ultimately,
Marco Rubio, several other
candidates. Ted Cruz is the
only one who said he didn't want
to get involved in this
Republican-on-Republican
fighting.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
Well, the other interesting
thing this and other things do
is make candidates like Chris
Christie, who was once
considered to be the moderate in
this race, and Scott Walker,
considered
to be social conservative,
they're not necessarily exactly
where they started out, are
they?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, Chris
Christie has now a very narrow
path ahead of him.
And you saw him go straight to
New Hampshire after his
announcement, because that New
Hampshire
straight talk express, that is
what he's hoping to get on. He
has got a tough road ahead
of him.
Scott Walker, it's interesting,
because he has made a good early
impression. But his
chips are all in Iowa. He needs
to win. If Chris Christie has
to win in New Hampshire,
Scott Walker has to win in Iowa.
And we know that social
conservatives, evangelical
voters are a really powerful
part of the Iowa caucuses.
GWEN IFILL: Fifteen
seconds on Scott Walker.
TAMARA KEITH: The interesting
thing about Scott Walker is that
when he was running for
reelection in Wisconsin, he was
all about, I can be a blue state
governor.
Now he's running in Iowa, needs
to win Iowa. And his preacher's
son, social conservative
side is coming out more than it
did in that reelection not that
long ago.
GWEN IFILL: Candidate's got to
do what a candidate's got to do.
Tamara Keith and Susan Page,
thank you both very much.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: What a
long, strange trip it's been.
After 50 years, the legendary
rock band the Grateful Dead
bowed out in a series of
concerts this weekend. There
was
history, some controversy, and a
whole lot more in the air. And
it was, no surprise,
one of the summer's
toughest tickets.
Our Jeffrey Brown was there.
JEFFREY BROWN: It was a weekend
of extended guitar solos,
era-evoking sounds, and "High
Times" images updated into
the digital graphics age.
There were good vibes of the
multigenerational time.
MAN: It's the last show. We
have got to see it. I have got
to pass that on to him.
JEFFREY BROWN: And a certain
amount of nostalgia, including
from band members looking back
years.
BILL KREUTZMANN, Grateful Dead:
We were just really gung-ho,
wanting to play. And
that's what -- that's how you
feel about every day. Any day
you had a chance to play music,
you got together and played.
JEFFREY BROWN: It was all part
of a major happening that played
out over three days
and into long nights.
It's called "Fare Thee Well," a
series of final concerts for a
band that blazed its
own path on the way to becoming
part of rock 'n' roll history.
We got here to Soldier
Field in Chicago ahead of the
celebration to talk to some of
the people who are putting
it on and taking part.
PETER SHAPIRO, Music Promoter:
It's going to be a big -- it's a
big circus.
JEFFREY BROWN: A big circus?
(LAUGHTER)
PETER SHAPIRO: Yes, because
there's so much going on.
Listen, it's driven by the
ringmaster
in the middle, which is the
band. And the music is the real
thing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Music promoter
Peter Shapiro put the event
together.
PETER SHAPIRO: Part of the
energy is the people. You will
see lots of spectacle.
So, all these different people
from all over America, from all
these different age
groups, you will feel it, you
can feel it, you know, and you
can't get that anywhere
else.
There's just no other scene.
That's why I think this sold out
in a minute, 200,000
tickets. And people are dying
-- they want -- they want to
also go back in time a bit.
JEFFREY BROWN: You think so?
PETER SHAPIRO: Yes,
I think it's...
JEFFREY BROWN: To what?
PETER SHAPIRO: To
a better time.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, at
least to a different time.
Grateful Dead helped to define
the '60s era counterculture, its
freedom, its excess, the
whole package. All these years
later, drummer Bill Kreutzmann
told me of the first time
he saw a performance by a young
man who would become the band's
most iconic figure, charismatic
guitarist Jerry Garcia.
BILL KREUTZMANN: Got as close
as we are right now, and I
watched him and I said, I'm
going to follow him forever just
to myself. And then about...
JEFFREY BROWN: But what was it
that you saw in him, that you
saw that made you say
that?
BILL KREUTZMANN: I saw magic
that you don't see in everyday
people. I saw the excitement
of life inside of him
just coming forth.
JEFFREY BROWN: A lot of people
saw the magic in Garcia and the
band, the beginnings of
a cultlike following called Dead
Heads, fans who followed the
band from concert to concert
through the years.
GREG KOT, The Chicago Tribune:
I think the Grateful Dead were a
social phenomenon as
much as a musical phenomenon,
and that the combination made
them truly unique in rock
history. I don't there's ever
been a band quite like them.
JEFFREY BROWN: Greg Kot is
music critic for The Chicago
Tribune.
GREG KOT: It was a caravan. It
wasn't just a band. It was
about the band and the
fans. Most bands, when they go
out on tour, they basically
establish a set list and play
the same songs in the
same order every night.
The Grateful Dead never played
the same songs in the same
order, much less even in the
same
way. They reinterpreted their
catalogue constantly, so every
show was different.
JEFFREY BROWN: Also different
and ahead of its time, what you
could call the band's
business mode, one based on
constant performing and
direct-to-consumer interaction,
including
encouraging fans to make
and share free recordings.
GREG KOT: There was no
middleman. They presaged the
Internet era in a lot of ways.
They were an Internet band
without the existence of the
Internet.
JEFFREY BROWN: How many
shows have you gone to?
MAN: I have gone to
98. Tonight is 99.
(CROSSTALK)
MAN: I got tickets -- I just
got tickets for 99.
Ninety-nine!
JEFFREY BROWN: That sense of
belonging to a community was on
display in the pre-concert
parking lot scene in Chicago, a
colorful festival of tie-dye and
T-shirts, often worn as proud
emblems of attendance at
Dead concerts of the past.
Many here were too young to have
taken part in the golden age of
the Dead, but they, too,
wanted to be part of the scene.
WOMAN: When else in my life
would I have the chance to see
something like this? It's
like really rare for
someone of my age.
JEFFREY BROWN: That golden age
was wonderful for the band and
its followers, until it wasn't.
Jerry Garcia died in 1995 of a
heart attack after years of
battling drug addiction. He
was just 53.
In his new memoir, "Deal,"
drummer Bill Kreutzmann writes
of the band's many highs and how
they
led to serious lows.
BILL KREUTZMANN: The drugs
played the worst, the baddest
part of that.
JEFFREY BROWN: What
did it do to the band?
BILL KREUTZMANN: It made us all
individuals. It made us feel
self-centered. It made
us not listen to music when we
were all playing together. It's
just really bad for music.
JEFFREY BROWN: Money also
became a factor, says
Kreutzmann, the need for it to
support
what inevitably became more
corporate entity than just a
group of young music-loving
guys.
BILL KREUTZMANN: The purity of
it may have run its length, but
it still would come back
at times. It just -- it took a
lot more work when it went to
the dark side. But
we managed. And that's another
reason why we're here now doing
this. We're all back.
We're all healthy again.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why exactly they
are back has been a question,
though.
Original band members
Kreutzmann, Bob Weir, Phil Lesh,
and Mickey Hart, ages 67 to 75,
took the stage with help from
younger stars, including Trey
Anastasio of Phish, one of
the many so-called jam bands
spawned by the Grateful Dead.
In the run-up to these concerts,
even many old-time fans had
grumbled about ticket prices,
availability and much more. Two
more concerts on the West Coast
were added to help meet
the demand.
GREG KOT: If they leave at this
and this is their going-away
party, I think everybody
will say, well, they
earned that weekend.
But if they extend this out and
it turns into a big cash-out
tour after this, I will be
-- and I -- I think I speak for
a lot of Dead Heads -- that will
be disappointing to see
them go out that way. So, it
will be interesting to see how
they handle this weekend.
JEFFREY BROWN: Is this really
the end of the Grateful Dead?
BILL KREUTZMANN: As far as I
know. I haven't seen any more
shows...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: So, you're
hedging a little bit?
BILL KREUTZMANN: Well, I --
because -- I will tell why I
hedge. You're very sensitive.
You picked that up right away.
I would like it to do -- to do
it more. Between you and me and
all your lovely fans, I would
like to have a couple more
shows on the East Coast.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, who knows.
We were there, and it was an
event, all right, music,
lights, 70,000 of the band's
closest friends soaking up a
remembrance of times past, for
one more weekend, at least,
the Dead very much alive.
From Soldier Field in Chicago,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Whether you're a
Dead Head or not, the fun
continues online, where you
can watch Jeff's full interview
with founding member Bill
Kreutzmann. Plus, read Jeff's
reporter's notebook about what
it was like covering the scene.
GWEN IFILL: Finally
tonight, Americans have
long crossed the border with
Mexico in search of cheaper
medical procedures, dental work
and prescription drugs. Now a
new trend is afoot: finding a
place to live out retirement
years.
Special correspondent Kathleen
McCleery has the story, part of
our occasional series about
long-term care.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: David Truly,
known as the Barefoot Professor,
plays in a local band
near Lake Chapala in Central
Mexico. He wrote his Ph.D.
dissertation on the migration
of retirees to this area.
DAVID TRULY, Autonomous
University of Guadalajara: Kind
of a range between maybe 8,000
to about
15,000, 16,000 full-timers, and
then -- but, in the winter, it
can blow up in just this
community to maybe 30,000.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Mexico's
largest lake is surrounded by
emerald green mountains.
The village of Ajijic draws
artists and writers.
Cobblestone streets are dotted
with galleries and restaurants
serving international cuisines.
No Spanish? No
problem. With Hawaii's
latitude and Denver's altitude,
the temperate climate has
attracted retirees for decades.
Mexicans have traditionally
taken elderly relatives into
their own homes. So, the
demand for assisted living and
nursing care wasn't high, until
foreigners, many of them
Americans, flocked here. Now
they are getting older and they
need more care.
DAVID TRULY: People are not
just aging here, but for the
first time, they're staying here
and they're not returning home.
So they're aging and dying in
place here.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: When
81-year-old John Simmons' doctor
told him he shouldn't live
alone, he came here to
Abbeyfield, an independent
senior living facility. His one
bedroom
casita sits in a lush garden
near a lap pool and a covered
patio.
JOHN SIMMONS, Retiree: I love
the light. I love the
cross-ventilation. I like the
kitchen tucked away. And so it
gives me room for an office and,
of course, the views
out the windows with all the
wonderful plants. The
landscaping here, I think, is
fantastic.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: The average
cost for independent living in
the U.S. is about $2,500
a month.
Here:
JOHN SIMMONS: The rent,
including all utilities,
connections for Internet,
television, all
of those things, plus three
meals a day, just a little over
$1,000 a month.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: One reason
for the cost difference, labor
is cheaper here. The minimum
wage is just 70 pesos, or less
than $5 a day. For those who
need a bit more care, there's
been a boom in assisted
living and nursing homes.
Seventy-two-year-old Rosemary
Grayson came here from Wales.
She made headlines 50 years
ago as the first "Playboy"
centerfold from the United
Kingdom and later went on to be
a journalist.
ROSEMARY GRAYSON, Retiree: I
was burnt out. I was in a state
of near nervous breakdown.
Lakeside Care put
me together again.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Ron Langley
is a Floridian whose Mexican
wife has a degree in geriatric
care run. Together, they run
Lakeside Care. He's proud of
the food he serves and the
caregivers he employs.
RON LANGLEY, Lakeside Care:
They have a great respect for
the elderly. And they
will go out of their way
to help an elderly person.
ROSEMARY GRAYSON: The people
here have compassion written
into their DNA. They do it
before
they know it. The caring is
just like of being in an
extended family.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Assisted
care like this in the United
States averages about $3,800
a month. And nursing homes can
cost upwards of $7,000. Langley
charges between $1,400
and $2,000 a month for meals,
cleaning, laundry and more.
RON LANGLEY: The only other
thing that a patient or a
resident here would pay for
would
be their medicines
and their doctors.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: And that
raises a potential concern:
Does the area have top-notch
health
care? A new hospital just
opened on the lake. Though
Medicare benefits don't apply
in Mexico, doctor's visits and
prescriptions are often less
than co-pays back home. And
Mexico's second largest
city is just an hour away.
DAVID TRULY: We are very close
to Guadalajara, which can really
be considered kind of a medical
hub of Latin America, some of
the finest medical colleges in
-- there's like three
universities
there.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: The Lake
Chapala area is beginning to
draw younger retirees, and
some are bringing mom or dad
along; 64-year-old Mark Woolley
and his wife, Ann (ph), bought
a house here a
year-and-a-half ago.
When his 86-year-old mother,
Kempie McKenna (ph), came for
visit, she liked what she saw
and chose a room at Abbeyfield.
WOMAN: The second time I came,
I came with suitcases. It's so
relaxing here, with the
sun coming in. The birds are up
there. The flowers are
blooming. It's just lovely.
And we're just
sitting and chatting.
MARK WOOLLEY, Retiree: She
always considered it more like
old-age storage, you know, a
lot of the homes in the United
States, and they weren't very
nice. And these were literally
homes here that people live in
and retire in, and with a bunch
of friends.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Senior care
is a cottage industry in the
Lake Chapala area now. There's
little oversight, no government
regulation, no scheduled
inspections. Many homes appear
well-run, but there's no
guarantee, so it's buyer beware.
Most places have just a handful
of rooms, but that's about to
change.
DR. TRINO ZEPEDA, Mexico: We
want to create a retirement
community with all the services
related with the aging in place.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Dr. Trino
Zepeda (ph) is working on a new
large-scale development.
DR. TRINO ZEPEDA: This is
assisted living apartments, and
it's going to be here.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: He expects
to break ground later this year
on a $35 million U.S.-style
community, eventually housing
350 people, offering independent
living, assisted, nursing
and memory care.
Whether those plans succeed may
depend on whether Mexico can
overcome an image problem.
The drumbeat of news about drug
cartel violence has included the
2012 kidnapping and killing
of 18 Mexican nationals near
Ajijic. And the U.S. State
Department warns citizens to
exercise caution in
the state of Jalisco.
But none of that worries
Rosemary Grayson.
ROSEMARY GRAYSON: You're a lot,
lot safer than I felt in the
U.K., and certainly in
the U.S. I think they said 100
people -- 100 Americans were
killed in Mexico last year.
And they have now said that
it's not a safe destination.
Well, you tell me how many
safe destinations in the
cities of America there are.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: And one more
concern: Life moves at a slower
pace here.
DAVID TRULY: Manana could mean
manana or the day after manana
or a week after manana.
But, you know, there is
something to be said for the
kind of laid-back, almost, you
know,
wake-me-up-when-we're
ready mentality.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Still, the
thriving foreign community has
lured baby boomers. The Lake
Chapala Society, in business for
60 years, offers services for
expats and others, from
free eye exams, to bridge, to
book clubs and volunteer
opportunities.
Mark and Ann Woolley can imagine
themselves living at Abbeyfield.
WOMAN: Oh, we're putting
our name on the list here.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: If the
Woolleys are any indication,
Mexico can expect an influx of
Americans crossing the
border for retirement.
I'm Kathleen McCleery for the
"PBS NewsHour" near Lake Chapala
,Mexico.
GWEN IFILL: If you would like
to know a little bit more about
Rosemary Grayson, who
Kathleen just introduced us to,
she tells the story of how she
met "Playboy" publisher
Hugh Hefner and became Miss
October 1964. That's on our Web
site.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the
"NewsHour" online right now: As
more expensive specialty
medicines
come on the market to treat
serious chronic diseases, at
least seven states are tackling
the problem of high
out-of-pocket payments. You can
learn about their efforts and
the
spiraling costs of
pharmaceuticals.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, the last-minute push
to meet a self-imposed deadline
to secure an Iran nuclear
deal.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.